Note that names that being with ‘G’, ‘M’, or ‘R’ are generally related to each other. Also note that a heavy theme/motif in this game is duality/twins/split personalities. Something to keep in mind. Finally, note that multiple ‘Outer Gods’ seem to exist in this world and an ‘Elden Lord’ can refer to whatever ruling entity that has allied with an ‘Outer God’ in a way that would make the ‘Elden’ title proper to capture this ruler’s true power as a lord.

The game refers to the Greater Will, which although ambiguous appears to refer to a literal entity that is an Outer God. It seems to be some sort of cosmic parasite, but who knows. This entity’s influence is represented by the golden light (‘grace’) that is seen everywhere. Queen Marika will come to be this entity’s vassal, who bears the Elden Ring, which is the physical manifestation of the Greater Will’s power and is made up of disparate runes (and is also the source of the power of the Erdtrees). The Two Fingers are literal emissaries that try to enact the desires of the Greater Will (not sure exaclty how the Two Fingers are created/born, are they also from space?). The Golden Order, as a human system of beliefs, eventually comes about to be to help enact the Greater Will’s desires.

Starting at the beginning, the Lands Between were first ruled by the dragons, led by Dragonlord Placidusax. The dragons were allied with an unnamed Outer God, who over time abandoned them and led to a soft decline of the Dragons power (and probably also to the crumbling of their sky city, Farum Azula, which gets subsumed in some sort of temporal vortex for some reason). Also around this time, what is now known now as the Erdtree was in a ‘primordial’ form and was understood as the ‘crucible’ of life. At some point, the Greater Will sends the Elden Beast within a star as a vassal and as mentioned Marika then becomes the vassal of the Greater Will (the Elden Beast is absorbed into her body). All that is known about Marika before this is that she is descended from the Numen race, which is a race that originated outside the Lands Between. For whatever reason, after becoming the Greater Will’s vassal, Marika goes into the Lands Between and establishes Leyndell. This will lead to many conflicts, one of which is the conflict with the dragons. As can be seen in the capital, the dragons attack (presumably for encroaching on their territory) but ultimately with the Greater Will’s power, Leyndell is able to stave off the Dragons. Over time, some individuals will join dragon cults and wish to become them. For example, the Magma Wyrms are actually humans who attempted to transform into dragons, but it only half-worked and they end up cursed to never fly. Eventually, Marika’s son Godwyn (Marika’s family tree is addressed a little later) will even befriend one of them, namely Fortissax. Another will join the magic academy and overall the dragons are clearly mostly pacified and that conflict is now over and dealt with.

Sometime around the establishing of Leyndell, the primordial erdtree is transformed into its current version. The crucible knights that defended the prior version were allowed to remain. One important falling out from this transformation is for the “omens”. Before the Golden Order was established, those born with signs of the crucible (e.g., horns, tails etc.) were seen as a blessing from the crucible. Afterwards, it is viewed as a curse (presumably because the Greater Will views it as an affront to its unity of power). In general, it is unclear how much of Marika’s actions and motivations could be ascribed to her or to the Greater Will, who uses her as its vassal. Anyways, those born with horns are shunned into the sewers and elsewhere. This would even escalate into Omenkillers deciding to hunt them down and was presumably a contribution to discrimination in general to any others seen as “impure”, which would also include the demi-humans and misbegotten, the bats (who sing a sing in real-life latin lamenting their new fate), the albinaurics, and the vulgar milita.

Noteworthy during this time period of Leyndell and the Golden Order, immortality is a power conferred by the Greater Will and the rune of death is held by Queen Marika’s half-brother, Maliketh, for safe-keeping. Well, technically the rune of death was held by the Dusk-Eyed/Gloam-Eyed Queen whose followers were the Godskin Apostles that use the blackflame and seemed to also use the deathbirds as its emissary. Maliketh slew the Queen and took her rune of death for himself/Marika’s purposes. Afterwards, it seems that beings during this time do not die up until they visit the Erdtree at which point, and this is only a theory, they are presumably absorbed into the Greater Will (or something like that).

Around this time, at the fringes, are some other Outer Gods. These include the ‘Formless Mother’ (a blood-based Outer God), a God of the Scarlet Rot, the Frenzied Flame, the One-Eyed Fell God of the Giants (essentially a fire god), and the aforementioned Gloam-Eyed Queen (essentially a goddess of death). I’ll get to most of those later, but for now want to camp out on the Giant’s Fell God, as this leads to war. Marika wages a war on the Fire Giants (led by a ‘Storm Ruler’), presumably because of the threat of their Forged Flame, a very powerful fire that emanates from the Giant’s pact with the One-Eyed Fell God and has the potential to burn the Erdtree. Marika has two noteworthy generals at this time, Radagon and Horah Loux (who is a chieftain of the neighboring Badlands). One noteworthy thing that occurs in the war is the Trolls betray the Giants and ally with Marika. They have holes in their stomachs as they removed the eye that used to be there to mark the presence of the Fell God. Marika’s forces win the war but when Marika realizes she cannot eradicate their Flame, she cursed the last fire giant to attend it for eternity, and that giant responded with a curse on Radagon to have his red hair (which is something he resents although some like Radhan view it with pride, presumably Radagon’s hair was golden before the curse). The Flame Monks are tasked with guarding this flame, although over time they are seduced by its power.

Queen Marika decides to marry Hoarah Loux, who rebrands himself and takes on the moniker Godfrey presumably to better enact the Greater Will (note this marriage may have already happened earlier). Godfrey and Marika have (at least) three children, Godwyn the Golden, as well as the twins Mogh and Morgott. Note that Morgott is also ‘Margit’ who you fight at the beginning because he is testing you. Mogh and Morgott are banished after they are birthed because they bear the aforementioned ‘omens’ (their horns) and are considered cursed. Mogh will resent this and eventually fall into league with ‘The Formless Mother’, while Morgott takes over the Capital in the long-run (as he remains a true believer in the Golden Order despite its treatment of him).

One event worth mentioning around now is the twin underground cities of Nokron and Nokstella. The lore around these cities is a little small, but it would seem what happened is certain individuals (the Nox) started messing with alchemy in a way the Greater Will did not approve. In other words, they created things such as the fingerslayer blade (a weapon powerful enough to kill the Two Fingers). This was naturally not considered okay and these individuals were essentially banished to live underground. In the past, an underground society already semi-existed with the Uhl (the minotaur people) but they were already gone or the Nox built around them. Over time, the Nox would experiment with creating artificial lifeforms and lords and also attempted to transform people into dragons (e.g. the dragonkin soldiers), presumably for power reasons. They are also the creators of the Albinaurics, who are artificial lifeforms. Eventually, these cities would be destroyed by beasts carried on falling stars (e.g. Astels). It would seem quite possible that the Astels were sent by the Greater Will to eradicate the dangers of these civilizations after they were self-contained underground (and remember the Elden Beast was itself sent as part of a falling star). I’m not so sure about that though, since you can see the fallingstar beasts and alabaster lords etc. in other areas besides underground. Further, they generally use gravity magic while you would think a creature in control of the Greater Will would be Holy-themed. Regardless, these twin cities get wiped out by the beasts contained on the stars that crash into them.

At some point, Marika sends Radagon to go to war with the neighboring Carian kingdom (who is the Liurnia region in the game), who is led by Queen Rennala. The true might of Carian is through the Academy of Raya Lurcaria. As a side note, the royals of Carian made their own brand of “retaliation” magic as a trump card in case the leaders of the Academy ever decided they wanted to take control over the royal family. This never needed to happen though as Rennala was respected with the Academy anyways. As another side note, Carian comes off as more egalitarian than Leyndell. As an example, after the trolls pledge fealty to Marika’s forces, you can see they were allowed to serve as knights in Carian. Meanwhile, in other places they are more likely to be seen used as slaves to pull carriages. Presumably, the conflict between Leyndell and Carian happens because the Greater Will views it as a threat to is unilateral power. The Academy uses intelligence to derive power from the stars instead of deriving power form faith in some sort of Outer God. It would seem the “primeval current” forms the basis for most sorceries and is not an Outer God itself (hence the distinction between the two although turtle pope would argue all of it could be conjoined with no inherit conflict). Although a sorcery town of Sellia exists in Caelid, the kingdom of Carian clearly has power through its high-level sorcery studies.

After meeting on the battlefield, in a surprise twist Radagon and Rennala fall in love and decide to wed. They perform the ceremony at the Church of Vows, deciding to forgive their past transgressions against each other (and between the kingdoms) to instead go forward in peace. They have three children, General Radahn, Praetor Ryhrad, and Lunar Princess Ranni. Meanwhile, Godfrey (aka Hoarah Loux) becomes the first ever Tarnished and is banished from the Lands Between. Why did he become Tarnished? It’s certainly ambiguous but it is indicated after he defeated every foe (i.e. the dragons, the fire giants, Carian became unified through marriage etc.), there was no further purpose for him and he had no use to the Greater Will or Marika. I would think there’s a little more to it though. Perhaps he discovered a certain secret of Marika we’re about to get to? Regardless, this leads over time to more and more Tarnished becoming banished (i.e. these people are not possessed by the Greater Will, that is they do not have the yellow/golden light inside of them).

After Godfrey is banished, Radagon in a surprise move decides to leave Rennala and marry Marika becoming the second queen consort. He leaves behind a piece of the Elden Ring (i.e. a rune) with Renala as a gift, indicating he truly did love her and there was a greater reason to this decision. So why did he do this? If you talk to the turtle at the church of vows, he mentions that a sculptor of a statute depicting Radagon knew a secret. If you go to the statute and cast a very specific incantation (Law of Regression), a message appears. This message simply states ‘Radagon is Marika’. Now, this does not mean that Radagon was Marika going incognito, they are clearly two separate people, but rather they are split halves of the same person. How did the former being split off into these two beings? Unclear, but presumably the Greater Will gave whoever the original predecessor was the ability to do so (or that person always had that ability). Another theory is the curse of the Fire Giants is what led Marika to be split into two beings to begin with, since it’s unclear when exactly Radagon was supposed to be around. Regardless, what is important here is they are each other halves, but they have different personalities. Radagon is more of an adherent to the Greater Will while Marika seems a little more tired of it. So it would seem Radagon marries Marika on behalf of the desire if the Greater Will, who wants this to happen so as to have more complete power (i.e. it is better that Radagon is the consort than Godfrey).

Radagon and Marika would go on to have two children, Malenia and Miquella (and maybe also Melina, as discussed later). Both of these children are born cursed, with a curse of rot and youth respectively. Presumably, these children are born cursed because of the nature of their parents although the state of Mogh and Margott would maybe suggest its moreso that other Outer Gods are just trying to interfere the best they can. Miquella ends up rejecting the Golden Order and the Greater Will because it did not have the power to cure his sister from the rot that afflicts her. Thus, he rejects the fundamentalism and ends up creating the Haligtree (an artifical erdtree) to help search for a cure. This also becomes a home for those discriminated (albinaurics, misbegottens etc.) by the Golden Order. Malenia ends up essentially serving Miquella instead of having her own ambitions from a lordship perspective. Incidentally, Miquella is also St. Trina (which is an alias used for an unclear reason).

In lieu of another time to discuss it, now is a good time to mention the Frenzied Flame. It’s not entirely clear why, but the tribe of normadic merchants were rejected by the Greater Will/Golden Order (again also refer to the discrimination against omens and misbegottens). Accused of heretical beliefs, they were rounded up and buried alive underground. Afterwards, they chanted a curse of despair and summoned the Frenzied Flame. This would seem to be a chicken and the egg situation. Were the nomads already adherents of this flame, or did the Golden Order bring this about by bringing the merchants to such despair as to create what the Golden Order feared from the grief they inflicted. In the end, the frenzied flame does currently exist and it uses the three fingers as its emissary. Presumably, it does this to be misleading to people as it tries to seduce adherents of the Golden Order (i.e. people who need to listen to the Two Fingers) to follow it. By all accounts, it seems to desire nothing other than chaos.

After the Radagon/Marika marriage, Ranni in specific is pissed about Radagon leaving her mother (who is devastated by it and ends up locked away because she is such a shell of herself). Ranni ends up organizing the Night of the Black Knives. She does this by stealing the rune of death from Maliketh and using it to form special knives that can kill the previously immortal demi-gods. It’s unclear how exactly she accomplishes this, and it seems suggested that Marika was actually involved because the Black Knife Assassins who enacted the plan were said to be from Marika’s tribe (e.g. Numens), and it is mentioned that Maliketh was betrayed by Marika in some way. Marika being involved would also explain why she ends up shattering the ring afterwards, but we’ll get to that in a bit. One thing that is known is that Maliketh definitely was not in on this all happening. This is known because he takes penance for the situation and becomes Gurranq, who in present times is constantly fighting the urge to feed on death and this is why he wants deathroots in present times.

Ranni’s orchestration of these events is able to kill Godwyn the Golden (more on that later), although not the other demi-gods. Godwyn’s death is devastating to Marika. In grief, she shatters the Elden Ring. Radagon attempts to repair it, but is unable to do so. It’s worth taking a second here to think about this. Why exactly does Godwyn’s death make Marika shatter the Elden Ring in defiance to the Greater Will? Is she literally just crazy in her grief? Does she view the Greater Will as the cause of these conflicts leading to her beloved son’s death and just wants it all to end? One answer would be the aforementioned thought that she orchestrated the events and just needed a pretext to get out from under the clutches of the Greater Will. Perhaps she knew having her beloved child killed would create enough emotion in her (grief) that she would then actually physically be able to do something the Greater Will would otherwise not allow her to do. Regardless, the Greater Will is angry about this but without the concentrated power of the Elden Ring it cannot do much about it other than to have Marika and Radagon imprisoned in the Erdtree to help keep its fading influence in-tact. Over time, this fading influence lets the Tarnished come back into the lands, although the Greater Will and the Two Fingers view this as an opportunity to get that Tarnished to repair the Elden Ring and began its rule anew. All of the NPCs mentioned in the intro cut-scene are Tarnished returning with various motivations, discussed a little later.

Thus, the Shattering War (confusingly named since the shattering of the ring is distinct from the Shattering which refers to the war afterwards…) between the aforementioned children begins. Dealing with Ranni first, one omission left during the Night of the Black Knives is that she also died during the events. However, her death was intentional. Ranni, along with Malenia and Miquella were Empyreans, which is to say they were chosen by the Two Fingers as potential suitors to become Elden Lord. I’ve seen talk that being an Empyrean means its required to be born of a single god, but that item description doesn’t actually say that, it just states Malenia and Miquella are empyrean and also are born of a single God. Still, presumably their status of being “pure” Marika offspring is probably why they are chosen. But why is Ranni chosen as suitable? Was she just that great of a person? Is she not actually Renalla’s child and is Marika’s child with Radagon instead? Nothing says that to be clear, and nothing indicates why she is an Empyrean, as far as I’ve seen. That part is extremely unclear to me. Regardless, what matters is Ranni rejects the status. Thus, she has her body killed so that she will never be forced as a vassal to the Greater Will the way that Marika is. Perhaps Ranni has strong feelings about this after seeing Radagon leave her mother seemingly only because the Greater Will desired it. And perhaps from potentially colluding with Marika who seems to not enjoy her vassal status anymore. After casting off her body, Ranni resides in a doll made to resemble a snow witch, who was a former mentor to Ranni and taught her own brand of dark moon magic. Presumably, this is also why Ranni interacts with Selvius, as the ‘art’ of dealing with dolls is necessary for her soul/spirit to stay alive now that her body is gone.

During the Shattering, Radahn claims a great rune. As indicated by a cut-scene, his forces attack Leyndell, presumably because he desires to be the ultimate ruler. However, Morgott rises up and defends the Capital. Morgott then goes to lead the now leaderless capital, although he does it in secret and assumes his “Margrit the Fell” form when needed. While Morgott is a true believer despite his treatment, his brother, Mogh, leaves to enact his ambitions with the Formless Mother instead. The irony with Morgott is he ‘should’ be accepted as the proper ruler by the Greater Will since he truly believes in it and is also suitably powerful, but alas he was born cursed and that is that apparently as far as the Greater Will is concerned. Sometime after, Malenia marches her cleanrot knights from the Haligtree to Caelid to do battle with Radahn. Why Malenia does this is extremely unclear to me. Is it as simple as she also desired to rule everything and viewed Radahn as the greatest threat and thus sought to defeat him first? The strange part is she marched essentially pass the Capital (and also Rykard and also Godrick) just to fight Radahn specifically which wouldn’t really track if the goal was to defeat all the other potential ruler candidates. Malenia doesn’t want to rule herself and acts in service of Miquella (who is beloved and considered a good ruler) but it’s not clear what Miquella’s beef would be with Radahn either beyond the other demigods who are around and more nearby.

Something worth noting is Radahn is holding up the stars during this time. As far as I know the reason for this isn’t explained. Presumably, the two reasons to do this is 1) to prevent beasts on the stars such as the one that wrecked the underground cities from destroying things; and 2) to prevent those who derive their sorcery powers from the stars from obtaining such power. The fact that within the game itself Ranni wants Radahn dead so the stars can create passage to the underground cities where the Fingerslayer Blade rests would suggest it is moreso the latter, an attempt by Radahn to hold off other people accessing forbidden power. But why would Malenia (or Miquella) care about that? Regardless, Malenia does march to Caelid and a battle ensues. The battle ends with Malenia ‘blooms’ her scarlet rot inside of her. One would infer that she does this because otherwise Radahn would have won the battle. Still, since Malenia does in fact do it, this devastates the region of Caelid and leaves Radahn a sicken shell of himself (which leads his followers to desire a festival to kill him, as he needs to dies but is considered too great to die anything but an honorable death). This bloom leaves Malenia comatose. One of her cleanrot knights, Finlay, manages to carry her back home completely by himself. Malenia remains alseep and during this time, Mogh steals away Miquella. He does so, presumably at the behest of the Formless Mother, with the intent of making Miquella the ultimate ruler in name, but in reality would want to use him as a puppet and essentially rule ‘through’ his name and acting as his consort. Miquella apparently rejects this and Mogh’s ambitions do not come to fruit.

Two asides during this time are Rykard and Godrick. Godrick is a descendant of Godefroy the Grafted, who is imprisoned in this game. It’s not explained but presumably they are descended from Godwyn, and thus descend from Godfrey who Godrick admires greatly. Ultimately however, Godrick is not respected. He ends up claiming a great rune (in the name of the Godwyn’s golden lineage) but he is defeated by Malenia in battle and ends up needing to flee Leyndell by disguising himself. Subsequently he claims Stormveil and Limgrave as his territory. It is not clear to me who was supposed to be holding that territory beforehand but presumably the golden lineage in general controlled the region. Meanwhile, Rykard rejected the Erdtree and Golden Order and instead committed what was considered blasphemy by trying to become a God himself (and without any Outer God). He attempts this, essentially anyways, by trying to devour anything and fusing all of that power together into one being (i.e. him).

One other thing to cover, Melina. Melina’s origin is basically not talked about in the game so basically all of this is conjecture. One notable thing is within the game’s code (although never in the game itself), Melina is referred to as Marika’s daughter. Given Melina’s actions and objectives during the game, it seems that Marika, somehow, managed to create her to have her enact her wishes. Now whether she was conceived before Marika was imprisoned or during, or if she is an actual child of Marika/Radagon, or just an ‘aspect’ of Marika is all unknown. But that is my read of her. No idea about her cursemark on her eye though. Let’s now discuss the tarnished named in the intro.

Motivations of Hoarah Loux: Is Godfrey, and wants to reclaim his title. Motivations of Fia: Godwyn did not actually die a true death (you can see his new form under the capital in deeproot depths, and presumably his body’s entwining with the roots of the Erdtree is causing the sprout of deathroot in the worlds and those that ‘live in death’). Eventually, Godwyn became worshiped as the prince of death. Fia desires the Elden Ring to be reformed, except with death as being a possibility in the new age. Motivations of Goldmask: Goldmask (and Brother Coryn) believes in the Golden Order but do not like how random people seem to act in a self-interested way while claiming it is the name of the Golden Order. Basically, they don’t like the fallibility of humans. The thing is, this also applies to the demigods and even Marika/Radagon. The problem that Gods can act as fickle as mortals. Thus, they want the Elden Ring reformed, except with a better distinction between Gods and mortals. Motivations of the Dung Eater: He was born cursed, presumably the ‘omen’ curse that emanates from the crucible form of the erdtree. Presumably, this led to discrimination toward him and he has responded with an attitude of ‘fuck the world I hate all of you’, combined with the idea that if everyone is cursed then no one is cursed. Thus, he wants to reform the Elden Ring but with everyone being ‘cursed’.

Motivations of Sir Gideon, the All-Knowing: Originally, Gideon appears to be a true follower of the Two Fingers and just wants the Elden Ring reformed, and also to learn things. However, it is later stated that while gaining knowledge, he glimpsed into the will of Queen Marika and shuddered in fear. It is also stated that “Gideon gained true knowledge after his long exchange with the Two Fingers - discovering all had been broken long ago; that the trembling fingers, bent with age, and the Erdtree itself, were no exception”. It would seem that, as discussed earlier, Marika’s true desire is to have the Elden Beast/Greater Will slain so she can be done with it all. Sir Gideon views this as a bad thing because without the Greater Will, everything will go to how it was before it got involved (which I guess he views as bad). Thus, while he originally supported the Tarnished potentially reinstating the Greater Will, what he discovered is what will really happen if a Tarnished reaches inside the tree is the Elden Beast will end up slain (as Marika desires) and he does not want this to happen, hence his change of heart.

Thus, leads to the endings of the game. The ‘normal’ ending and its variants are essentially already covered. In addition, one can ally with Ranni or the Frenzied Flame, which make of all that as you wish.